---
layout: post
title: "CodeKata"
date: 2014-04-14 00:00:00 -0600
comments: true
categories: 
---

{%img right /images/kitten2.jpg%}

How do you get to be a great musician? It helps to know the theory,
and to understand the mechanics of your instrument. It helps to have
talent. But ultimately, greatness comes from practicing; applying the
theory over and over again, using feedback to get better every time.

How do you get to be an All-Star sports person? Obviously fitness and
talent help. But the great athletes spend hours and hours every day,
practicing.

But in the software industry we take developers trained in the theory
and throw them straight in to the deep-end, working on a project. It’s
like taking a group of fit kids and telling them that they have four
quarters to beat the Redskins (hey, we manage by objectives,
right?). In software we do our practicing on the job, and that’s why
we make mistakes on the job. We need to find ways of splitting the
practice from the profession. We need practice sessions.

### The Kata

What makes a good practice session? You need time without
interruptions, and a simple thing you want to try. You need to try it
as many times as it takes, and be comfortable making mistakes. You
need to look for feedback each time so you can work to improve. There
needs to be no pressure: this is why it is hard to practice in a
project environment. it helps to keep it fun: make small steps forward
when you can. Finally, you’ll recognize a good practice session
because you’ll came out of it knowing more than when you went in.

Code Kata is an attempt to bring this element of practice to software
development. A kata is an exercise in karate where you repeat a form
many, many times, making little improvements in each. The intent
behind code kata is similar. Each is a short exercise (perhaps 30
minutes to an hour long). Some involve programming, and can be coded
in many different ways. Some are open ended, and involve thinking
about the issues behind programming. These are unlikely to have a
single correct answer. I add a new kata every week or so. Invest some
time in your craft and try them.

Remember that the point of the kata is not arriving at a correct
answer. The point is the stuff you learn along the way. The goal is
the practice, not the solution.

### Links

* [A description of how this all started](/kata/codekata-how-it-started)

* Sometimes ‘kata’ isn’t quite the right word; [karate uses other techniques to teach too](/kata/kata-kumite-koan-and-dreyfus).

### The Kata

* [Kata 1: Supermarket
  pricing](/kata/kata01-supermarket-pricing). Pricing looks easy, but
  scratch the surface and there are some interesting issues to
  consider.

* [Kata 2: Karate Chop](/kata/kata02-karate-chop). A binary chop
  algorithm is fairly boring. Until you have to implement it using
  five totally different techniques.

* [Kata 3: How Big, How Fast?](/kata/kata03-how-big-how-fast) Quick estimation
  is invaluable when it comes to making design and implementation
  decisions. Here are some questions to make you turn over the
  envelope.

* [Kata 4: Data Munging](/kata/kata04-data-munging). Implement two simple data
  extraction routines, and see how much they have in common.

* [Kata 5: Bloom Filters](/kata/kata05-bloom-filters). Implement a simple
  hash-based lookup mechanism and explore its characteristics.

* [Kata 6: Anagrams](/kata/kata06-anagrams). Find all the anagram combinations
  in a dictionary.

* [Kata 7: Reviewing](/kata/kata07-howd-i-do). What does our code look like
  through critical eyes, and how can we make our eyes more critical?

* [Kata 8: Objectives](/kata/kata08-conflicting-objectives). What effects do
  our objectives have on the way we write code?

* [Kata 9: Checkout](/kata/kata09-back-to-the-checkout). Back to the
  supermarket. This week, we’ll implement the code for a checkout
  system that handles pricing schemes such as "apples cost 50 cents,
  three apples cost $1.30."

* [Kata 10: Hash vs. Class](/kata/kata10-hashes-vs-classes). Is it always
  correct to use (for example) classes and objects to structure
  complex business objects, or couple simpler structures (hash as
  Hashes) do the job?

* [Kata 11: Sorting it Out](/kata/kata11-sorting-it-out). Just because we need
  to sort something doesn’t necessarily mean we need to use a
  conventional sorting algorithm.

* [Kata 12: Best Sellers](/kata/kata12-best-sellers). Consider the
  implementation of a top-ten best sellers list for a high volume web
  store.

* [Kata 13: Counting Lines](/kata/kata13-counting-code-lines). Counting lines
  of code in Java source is not quite as simple as it seems.

* [Kata 14: Trigrams](/kata/kata14-tom-swift-under-the-milkwood). Generating
  text using trigram analysis lets us experiment with different
  heuristics. (And it let's us create new, original Tom Swift stories…)

* [Kata 15: Playing with bits](/kata/kata15-a-diversion). A diversion to
  discover the pattern in some bit sequences.

* [Kata 16: Business Rules](/kata/kata16-business-rules). How can you tame a
  wild (and changing) set of business rules?

* [Kata 17: More Business Rules](/kata/kata17-more-business-rules). The rules
  that specify the overall processing of an order can be complex too,
  particularly as they often involve waiting around for things to
  happen.

* [Kata 18: Dependencies](/kata/kata18-transitive-dependencies). Let’s write
  some code that calculates how dependencies propagate between things
  such as classes in a program.

* [Kata 19: Word chains](/kata/kata19-word-chains). Write a program that solves
  word chain puzzles (cat → cot → dot → dog).

* [Kata 20: Klondike](/kata/kata20-klondike). Experiment with various
  heuristics for playing the game Klondike.

* [Kata 21: Simple Lists](/kata/kata21-simple-lists). Play with different
  implementations of a simple list.


I have to admit that I’m nervous doing this. My hope is that folks
will work on the kata for a while before discussing them; much of the
benefit comes from the little "a-ha!" moments along the way. So, it’ll
be interesting to see how (and if) the discussion develops.
